# Trent Decaf Compiler AMOD-4901

This repo contains a simple programming language for Trent's AMOD-4901 course. The compiler is based off the expresso language from MIT's 2002 version of [SMA-5502](https://dspace.mit.edu/bitstream/handle/1721.1/35804/6-035Fall-2002/OcwWeb/Electrical-Engineering-and-Computer-Science/6-035Computer-Language-EngineeringFall2002/CourseHome/index.htm).

## Getting Started

### Requirements
Below is a list of required software dependencies that must be installed on your system in order to compile and run the project:
* .NET SDK 6 (required)
  * The entire compiler is written in cSharp and as such .NET is necessary in order to run and compile any project.
* [ANTLR Toolkit](https://www.antlr.org/download.html) (semi-required)
  * This is a parsing and lexing framework equivlant to JLEX and CUP, the tooling is required in order to generate the lexer and parser for building the compiler.
* Taskfile (semi-optional)
  * Taskfile is a general language agnostic task system that we use for running shell commands it let's us run simple shell commands such as `task` to build the entire compiler without having to use something like `make` or `.sh` files allowing for better cross platform use. If you do not have taskfile installed the compiler can be build by copying the commands directly and running them in bash, or the corresponding commands on whatever platform your using.

### Dependencies
* [CommandLineParser](https://github.com/commandlineparser/commandline)
  * This is a simple library for building a command line application it makes the options system nice and easy to use.
* [ANTLR](https://www.antlr.org/)
  * This is used for parsing and lexing.
* [Verify](https://github.com/VerifyTests/Verify)
  * This library is used for snapshot testing.

### Building
The compiler can be built using the command `task build`.

#### Usage

By default the compiler can be used by running `task -- <opts>`, you can run `task experiment` which will run the compiler with whatever is in `./example.decaf`

### Testing

The compiler uses `MSTest` and [`Verify`](https://github.com/VerifyTests/Verify) for testing. 

Tests can be run using `task test`, you can use `task test -- --filter <query>` to run specific tests.

### Extra Commands
* `task format` - This can be used to format the entire compiler and test suite.
* `task clean` - This can be used to clean up any artifacts generated by the compiler.


## Walkthrough

### CLI

TODO: Write documentation

### Lexing

Our language uses [antlr](https://www.antlr.org/) for lexing, we implement the lexing rules according to the `expresso_spec`. The grammar exists in [`./decaf/Frontend/DecafLexer.g4`](./decaf/Frontend/DecafLexer.g4).

The following tokens are implemented:

* Keywords (Meaningful words within the language)
  * boolean
  * callout
  * class
  * else
  * extends
  * false
  * if
  * int
  * new
  * null
  * return
  * this
  * true
  * void
  * while
* Attributes (Text items we skip over)
  * Whitespace/WSS (`space`,`\t`,`newline`)
  * Comments (start with `//` and end at end of line)
  * newline (`\n`,`\r\n`)
* Operators
  * General
    * LPAREN (`(`)
    * RPAREN (`)`)
    * LBRACE (`{`)
    * RBRACE (`}`)
    * LBRACK (`[`)
    * RBRACK (`]`)
    * SEMI (`;`)
    * COMMA (`,`)
    * DOT (`.`)
  * Prefix
    * NOT (`!`)
  * Arithmetic
    * PLUS (`+`)
    * MINUS (`-`)
    * MULT (`*`)
    * DIV (`/`)
  * Relational
    * LEQ (`<=`)
    * GEQ (`>=`)
    * GT (`>`)
    * LT (`<`)
  * Equality
    * EQ (`==`)
    * NEQ (`!=`)
  * Conditional
    * AND (`&&`)
    * OR (`||`)
  * Assignment
    * ASSIGN (`=`)
* Literals
  * INTLIT (e.g. `1234`)
  * BOOLLIT (`true`,`false`)
  * NULLLIT (`null`)
* Identifiers
  * ID (e.g. `myVariable123`)

The lexer will read the source file and convert the characters in the file into a stream of tokens that can be interpreted by the parser. This is referred to as a scanner based parser compared to a scannerless parser which would read characters directly from the source file. The advantage of using a scanner when combined with lalr parsing used by antlr is that the number of parser states is much lower you don't need one for every valid character instead you need one for every valid token in every valid state. We made the decision to handle literal values such as integers and booleans in the lexer rather than the parser as this also reduces the number of tokens and simplifies the parser at the small cost of slightly less contextual error messages.

Tests for the lexer can be found in [`./decafTests/LexerTests.cs`](./decafTests/LexerTests.cs).


### Parsing

We also use `Antlr` for parsing the grammar can be found in [`./decaf/Frontend/DecafParser.g4`](./decaf/Frontend/DecafParser.g4)

Antlr generates `DecafParser.cs` from this grammar which is programmatic implementation of an LL parser. In [`./decaf/Frontend/ParseTreeMapper.cs`](./decaf/Frontend/ParseTreeMapper.cs) we map the antlr rule contexts to a proper parsetree defined in [`./decaf/IR/ParseTree.cs`](./decaf/IR/ParseTree.cs) which we can use for furthur program analysis and to compile your program.

When constructing our parseTree we ignore a few rules such as `new` expressions as they won't be supported in our language.

Our tests for parsing are implemented in [`./decafTests/ParserTests.cs`](./decafTests/ParserTests.cs), we use snapshot testing and capture the output of the parseTree based on the input program.

### Semantic Analysis

After are done parsing we move on to the next stage of the compiler the middle end which is responsible for scoping, semantic analysis and typechecking.

The first sub stage in our pipeline is scoping, we implement a simple scope system in [`./decaf/MiddleEnd/ScopeMapper.cs`](./decaf/MiddleEnd/ScopeMapper.cs). This is implemented as a simple traversal over the parse tree, where we map the parseTree to itself filling in scope information as we go. While we are doing this we check for any scoping errors such as duplicate declaration or use before declarations. A scope is defined as a hierarchy where each scope contains a list of variables and methods declared in the scope and a reference to its parent scope. When we are looking up an identifier we start at the current scope and check if the identifier is declared if it is not we move to the parent scope and repeat until we either find the declaration or run out of scopes in which case we throw an error. This is implemented in [`./decaf/Utils/Scope.cs`](./decaf/Utils/Scope.cs). As we track a value with scope we use `ScopeMapper` to track very primitive top level use analysis.

After we are done scoping and have a brand new parseTree with scope information we move on to semantic analysis itself, this is implemented in [`./decaf/MiddleEnd/SemanticAnalysis.cs`](./decaf/MiddleEnd/SemanticAnalysis.cs). This is also implemented as a simple traversal over the parse tree, where we do basic property checks of the nodes themselves a list of semantic analysis rules can be found below:
* `Program.Main()` exists
  * `Program.Main()` has no parameters
  * `Program.Main()` returns void
* TODO: Add more semantic analysis rules

Tests can be found in: [`./decafTests/SemanticTests.cs`](./decafTests/SemanticTests.cs) which also uses snapshot testing to capture the output of the semantic analysis traversal.

### TypeChecking

After we are done semantic analysis we move on to type checking, this is implemented in [`./decaf/MiddleEnd/TypeChecker.cs`](./decaf/MiddleEnd/TypeChecker.cs). This is also implemented as a simple traversal over the parse tree. We produce a brand new tree during this traversal defined in [`./decaf/IR/TypedTree.cs`](./decaf/IR/TypedTree.cs) which is very similar to the parse tree but every expression node is annotated with a type, scopes map to signatures instead of use, and we drop extra property information that has been converted to the nodes signatures. During this traversal we check for type errors and throw if we find any, we don't directly define a list of type checking rules as they are best found in the code themselves but we are essentially trying to ensure a progarm is valid, things like method calls make sense, and array indexing is done on arrays with integers, etc.

Tests can be found in: [`./decafTests/TypeCheckerTests.cs`](./decafTests/TypeCheckerTests.cs) which also uses snapshot testing to capture the output of the type checking traversal.


### TODO: Code Generation


## TODO:
This section contains a list of general TODO's left on the project:
* Parsing
  * Testing
    * Operator Precedence
    * Kitchen Soup
    * Targeted Tests

Copyright ©️ 2025 Jake Follest, Tony Tran